I inferred from your work on disarmament and so
forth that you would have been in effect opposed to
international cooperation in terms of weapon
systems and so forth. Well, what I'm opposed to is
wars. And what I'm interested in is the reduction
of the chance of war. Now clearly, if you take the
two extremes, If the United States became
extremely aggressive, started to build up
arguments on, say, twice the present scale, this
would be destabilizing. It would force the
opposition to do the same thing and might well
precipitate a preemptive war. I mean, it is not
safe in the modern world to have an extremely
aggressive policy. On the other hand, it's quite
unsafe to disarm. I mean, obviously, if the
Russians The government wouldn't last six
months. They get themselves blown up. And
country-wise, so there must be some policy in
between which is optimum from this point of view.
And my own view is that the present levels of force
are set by a competition with the Russians. We have
to have as many tanks as the Russians, as many
ballistic missiles as the Russians, and so on. And
that the levels are excessive. that the present
levels are more than is required for deterrence,
and that this is dangerous, that we're erring on
the top side. But the only way of reducing it is to
reduce by agreement. And there are very strong
reasons, I think, for reaching agreements to
reduce mutually. The difficulties, of course,
are verification and so on, but the Deterrence is
so much in excess of any conceivable requirement
that I think a moderate degree of cheating would
not really do you any harm. I mean, we would be no
better off if the Russians had their present level
of ballistic missiles and we had twice as many.
We'd be no safer at all, not the least. Because
already there are sufficient missiles on both
sides to ensure the complete destruction of the
other society, plus a considerable margin over
for dealing with third parties who might
intervene. And the thing is, the damage that will
be done is so out of proportion of the object in view
that I think anyone who has any knowledge, I don't
know anyone who has any knowledge of this matter,
who doesn't think that the levels ought to be
reduced, and they can only be reduced by
negotiation. And even the Verdi-Vostok
Agreement I was in favour of, because it sets a
level, it sets levels rather above the present
levels, which are ludicrously high for any
requirement, but you can at least, at least then
becomes, if you have an agreement, it becomes a
numerical map. And on the whole, Congress is not
very interested in numbers. I mean, they don't
know the difference between 3,000 warheads and
100 warheads. I once tried an experiment on this. I
was in a meeting, I think I was chairman of the
meeting, discussing what was a level of effective
deterrence from the point of view of England. And
this was a fairly technical discussion of the
defence book. And we were talking about this, and
the Foreign Office had asked whether they could
just come in and listen. We said we didn't want to
discuss the questions of what was politically
acceptable, we just wanted to discuss the
technical question. I mean, like reliability of
missiles, number reaching the target, all this
kind of amount of damage done, all this kind of
thing. And I said, towards the end of the meeting, I
said, look, we've got the Foreign Office here.
They're the people who will, in effect, make the
decision to use these things or not to use them. I'd
like to ask them a very simple question. I said,
suppose that there is a 50% chance of one megaton
landing on Piccadilly Circus, and this is a risk
you might have to take. For what would you take this
risk? What desirable things are there in the world
for which you would take a 50% risk of one megaton on
Piccadilly Circus? The foreigners' reaction was
very interesting. They had no notice of this
question. They just looked poor.
there's no such thing. There's nothing. I said,
not the Middle East oil? He said, no, of course not.
Not the control of the Indian Ocean? No, nothing.
And it was quite clear that for him, effective
deterrence was somewhere below a 50% chance of one
megaton on Piccadilly Circus. Well, there you
are, you see. That, in fact, In the real world,
people will not deliberately plan a war if there
are high probabilities of the major towns being
destroyed.
So that the levels are excessive and the present
levels are defended on grounds that it might be
possible for the other side, if they had a
sufficient preponderance, to destroy all our
weapons before they fire. This is not really
numerically plausible. I mean, how many... After
all, three or four weapons left will destroy the
major cities of the other side. And how many shots
have you got to have at each ballistic missile silo
or each submarine to ensure a high probability
that all but one or two were destroyed? Well, it's
not all. So I think no one... With much lower levels
of deterrence than we have now, No one would
rationally start a war. And on the whole, the
chances of accidentally starting a war are
increased with the level of forces. So from the
accidental war point of view, it pays you to reduce
them. From the deliberate war point of view, I
think, it also pays you to reduce them. Because if
anyone had a war, it would do less damage. And the
deterrence is just as good. So I think I'm
perfectly consistent. I'm interested in
disarmament. I'm interested in disarmament. not
for emotional reasons, but to reduce the chance
and the consequences of nuclear war. And I don't
think disarmament to zero is necessarily the
optimum. The most important thing, I think, at the
moment is to decrease the effectiveness of the
tank. You see, there is a risk of the Russians
feeling that attack on Russia and on America is
completely deterred. And therefore, they could
safely drive their tanks across Europe. And it's
well known that a few years ago, there was a
detailed analysis of this by well informed
people, which was leaked to Der Spiegel, I think,
and published, which arrived at the conclusion
that the Russians could not be held for a week
before they reached the Rhine. Well now, if they
tried that, it is an extremely dangerous
situation, because beyond doubt, We would use
tactical nuclear weapons after about day two.
Now, there isn't in fact such a thing as a tactical
nuclear weapon. There's really no distinction.
And we would certainly use so-called tactical
nuclear weapons to destroy bridges back in
Poland. And very soon we'd be using them to destroy
tank factories. And the thing would escalate, I
think, in spite of the deterrence. I think it's a
great danger of such an enterprise escalating.
And so I think the important things at the moment
are to... Well, I can't talk about what has
actually happened, what the present situation
is, but the situation in which the tank was a very
effective weapon, which certainly existed five
or ten years ago, is a very dangerous situation.
And I don't know, or at least I don't know what the
situation is at the moment. Come in. After the
tape's off, I'll make a comment on that, by the way.
My comments are not important.
What about the risk in building nuclear energy
plants, for example, if you don't... Well, I mean,
clearly, this is a very important question
indeed. I mean, it's not a negligible question.
I think The difficulty in public discussion of
this is quite a general one. It is this, that if in a
certain activity you have a risk, now what
arguments do you use for taking or not taking this
risk? The trouble with the Sierra Club and the
ecological lobby generally is that they argue
that if we do this, There will be disadvantages,
certain adverse things, undesirable things,
which will certainly happen. There will also be
risks of catastrophes of one sort and another.
Therefore, we should not do this. Therefore, we
oppose this. The trouble with this line of
argument is that it can be used against all
alternative causes of action. So you're left with
no causes of action. They may be different groups
that oppose the different ones, or they may be the
same one. Now, in fact, I think it is true that all
human actions have both advantages and
disadvantages and have risks associated with
them. And the problem of decision is to make your
decision so as... In some sense, to maximize the
advantages, minimize the disadvantages, and in
particular, to minimize catastrophes. But you
are going to reduce these things to zero. I think
the ecological lobby generally is not living in
the real world. That's to say, they assume that you
can have certainty in human affairs. I was talking
about this recently in Santa Barbara. And I was
talking about bouncing one thing against another
and so on, and someone got up and asked, but what is
your long-term policy? It's not tolerable to go on
like this. And I said, well, actually, you know,
life is riding a bicycle on a tightrope. It's not
driving a tricycle on a road. That's to say... You
keep your equilibrium and keep things going, not
by the nature of the system, but by continual
adjustments. It's an interaction between what
happens and the thing you're doing, which is
important. And I think the people who argue
against any sort of technological developments
feel that they ought to be riding a tricycle. That
the things they're doing ought to have the
automatic safety from from tipping over of the
third wheel. You shouldn't have to avoid
catastrophes by continual adjustment. But I
think the nature of the world and the nature of
society is that, in fact, it is a cybernetic system
in which you have to adjust the progress as you go
along in order to steer yourself between the
different kinds of disasters. And, well, now, if
you apply this to nuclear power stations,
obviously, you can, nuclear power stations are
dangerous. If a nuclear power station falls to
pieces, large amounts of radioactivity will be
emitted, and there will be a catastrophe. A
meaning by catastrophe is something in which more
than a few hundred people are killed. I mean, a
thing in which a hundred people are killed is not a
catastrophe. Catastrophe is a thing that society
doesn't want to accept. I mean, they'll accept
accidents to jumbo jets. I landed in New York in the
middle of a lot of fire engines the other day
because a jumbo jet had lost one engine. Well,
society accepts this kind of thing, but they'll
accept very large numbers of deaths which are not
obvious. They will, for instance, accept in the
last of the big London fogs, the deaths from
respiratory disease by 2,000 over this short
period. So in a sense, the London Fog killed 2,000
people, which can't identify the people. And many
of them would probably have died anyway in the
succeeding weeks. So no one worried much. But the
fogs were so unpleasant, and particularly this
last one was so unpleasant, that they did, in fact,
do something about it. And they have now got rid of
the London Fogs by control of the burning of coal.
Well, the For easily understandable historical
reasons, the danger of accidents to nuclear
plants, even quite remote ones, are unacceptable
at the moment. But people are not considering the
alternative dangers. And, of course, one can
argue empirically. There have been a lot of
nuclear power stations banned, particularly in
England has been getting something like 10 or 15%
of its power from nuclear fuel for a good many
years. And in this country, there are all the
weapons reactors.
Been here for 30 years or so. And no one has yet been
killed by them, as far as one knows. There have been
accidents. The most serious accident, I suppose,
was the Canadian accident at Chalk River just
after the war. There were some cows who started
giving radioactive milk after an accident in
England and the milk had to be poured down the drain
and there was a great scene about this. There have
been minor accidents which are a warning that if
you don't take the proper precautions there may be
more serious accidents. But I think the
alternatives seem to me less desirable. quite
disturbed about the big coal power plants in Utah,
which are in the middle of some of the finest
scenery in the United States. And I don't know in
detail about them, but is it really acceptable to
have all this smoke and stuff on the outside in the
air over southern Utah? The inhabitants of Utah
don't mind because they don't live there. And the
inhabitants of California, I think, do mind to
some extent because this is one of their holiday
areas. The obvious thing to do is to put the coal
power stations in Mexico. Yeah. But you can't say
this. Well, so my feeling is that the risks of
operation of nuclear power stations can be
contained. It's important, of course, not to have
the AC or whatever it's called now, both judge and
jury. That I think there must be a regulatory
agency who isn't responsible actually for
running them as well.
that you can avoid having accidents with nuclear
power stations with a frequency which matters to
anyone. I mean, once you get up to one accident in
100,000 years, well, I don't much mind if it
occurs. I mean, it's a negligible thing. It's, you
know, a tenth of a person per year or something of
this sort. Of course, every human activity kills
people. I mean, people fall off scaffolding. And
building buildings is extremely dangerous. I
mean, building nuclear power stations is much
more dangerous than operating them. I think more
people are likely to be killed by falling off the
scaffolding than by escape of radioactivity. The
one that does worry me is the disposal of waste. And
I'm about to attempt to write a report on this. I
haven't got around to it at all yet. But it looks as
if someone's going to pay me for writing a report on
it. I think it's a serious problem, but I suspect
not an insoluble one. I don't really know enough
about it at this point to give an opinion. It might
turn out that it's really very undesirable and is
fatal to the nuclear power program, but I imagine
that satisfactory solutions can be found. I mean,
what I want to do is to read up on the whole subject.
Sir, I have a question. I'd like to interject a
personal question, if I may. Are you, as a
scientist, offended by comments of other people,
like the oceans are dying, for example, or soon the
Red Sea will be gone? I'm irritated by them because
of the... I don't believe that in order to support
what you emotionally believe to be a good cause,
you should tell what you know to be lies. And
clearly, Mr. Nader, and I won't say Mr. Nader, I'm
not going to say anyone personally, but there
clearly are people around, I specifically
exclude Mr. Nader, there are people around who are
telling lies which they know to be lies, and there
are a great many others who are telling lies which
they haven't taken the trouble to find that
they're lies. Okay, now the point of this question
is, is when a man of your eminence and ability
writes a report on nuclear waste, and suppose the
report suggests that nuclear waste disposal with
a minimum risk is possible, shouldn't there not be
some way for scientists to publicize this to the
general public? Well, there's a great deal of, I
mean, there is a great deal of publicity on this
subject. I mean, if I should write a report to the
people who are paying me, their interest is, their
ultimate interest is, is there a field in which
they could make a useful contribution? I mean, can
we, we're trying to think of a program of work on
disposal of nuclear waste which is useful and
which, of course, can be paid for. And one of the
things we are starting to do is simply to write as
objective a report as possible on what the risks
are in the different possible schemes. I mean, it
involves things like, are the extrapolations in
the number of nuclear power stations in any sense
realistic? I mean, the trouble is that many of the
projections in the nuclear power industry
involve such a very rapid increase. that you are
allowed to get into trouble because there is a
limit to the rate at which you can safely grow.
Because you see, as I say, the thing is a steering
problem of adjusting yourself as you go along. If
you're a crash programmer, you're extremely
allowed to get yourself in a dangerous situation
before you notice it. I mean, there is a certain
deliberate haste, as I think the political phase
usually is, is desirable. You mustn't go madly
into things which may actually prove dangerous
you've got to go into them rather slowly and see
what happens it's like the question of the ozone
you see as far as i know no one really knows what
anything you do will do to the ozone layer i mean
will the present production of these spray
compounds do anything to the ozone layer well i
don't think anyone could put their hand on their
hearts and say they were certain But what is
certain is that the effect is quite slow. Because
after all, we've been using these bloody cans for
years and years and years, and not much has
happened. And the ozone layer fluctuates 50%
anyway. And what you've got to do is to monitor it
and keep an eye on it. And at some point, you may
decide certain things are dangerous. But you
don't need, just because there's a possibility of
something wrong, to go into a lot of legislation
and a lot of inconvenience very rapidly. But this
is because the use of these things is not going to
increase enormously rapidly. If we were going to
have 10 times as many used every year, then clearly
it would be dangerous. But if you're going along at
about the present level, slowly increasing,
you'll keep an eye on it. So I think there's a great
deal to be said in these dangerous situations of
deliberate haste. Let's say making haste rather
slowly. Now, I have one more question. Looking
back and reading about your career, You almost
typify, well, you excel actually, in the kind of
scientist who's able to mix together academic,
military, and business worlds. Was this
deliberate in your career? I've always had this
feeling on the one side that what I like doing is
science and what I ought to do is science. And then I
become interested in other things and I've gone
off and and done them, and finally I began to
realize that I had the two sides to my character. I
like doing both. And in fact, I've leant away from
science in the latter part of my career. I haven't
really done much science for the last ten years. I
mean, I've had a very good group in Cambridge, and
I've encouraged them, and I've spent a lot of time
talking to them. But personally, I haven't done
much. I mean, what I can do still is talk to people
and suggest what they would do. But I usually
decide it's really too much of a business to do it
myself. And I think also science is to some extent a
young man's game. I mean, I've not got the
originality and the power of going out and
starting new things now as I get older. I mean,
after all, I feel I'm going to die before long.
There's no good starting very long-term
projects. I mean, like when I started
investigating the floor of the ocean, it would be
silly to do something, start something like that
again at my age, you see. I think it's partly, this
is partly, you know, a background and class thing.
I know it's a very unfashionable thing to say, but I
think you come from a well-off background where
there's not been a tremendous struggle. then you
easily get a self-confidence and a feeling you can
do things, feeling you're the man who knows about
it and ought to make good choices. And you can, in
fact, chase around people from other backgrounds
and get what you want. I mean, like these poor chaps
who were in charge of demagnetizing ships during
the war, and they just didn't know what had hit
them. They were out before they knew what was
happening. They didn't know any of the right
people They didn't know how to behave. They
wouldn't behave as badly as I was willing to
behave. I mean, I've at various times been willing
to behave pretty badly.
And a certain feeling about the value of money, an
objective feeling about money. You see, people
ordinarily have a realistic feeling about sums of
money they normally spend themselves. Parkinson
pointed out. that you will always, on a board of
directors, get a vigorous discussion about
building a bicycle shed. But if you have a
discussion about building a nuclear-powered
aircraft, no one will know anything about it, and
you'll get hardly any discussion at all. And this
is very true, that people have got realistic ideas
about money they've been used to hearing talked
about. I mean, if you've always known fairly rich
people, and if you've always moved in Circles
where people are directors of companies and high
officials and governments and so on. You're used
to talking about large sums of money. And so that
you start with an advantage against people
brought up in different backgrounds. This sounds
rather unfair and extremely unfashionable. And
of course it's clearly extremely inequitable,
but that's how things work.